
Creating A Safe Lab Environment
===============================

Overview
--------

**Lab Description:** The ability to create and customize a safe lab
environment is crucial for analyzing malware. The goal of this lab is to
demonstrate the ability to create configurations that provide virtual
machine isolation and demonstrate the ability to apply these concepts to
your own virtual lab environment.

**Lab Environment:** For this lab, you will be creating your own lab
environment. You will need the following to complete this lab:

-  A host system capable of virtualization – this typically requires
   Intel’s VT-x support enabled through the BIOS or UEFI firmware

-  It is recommended to use a host system that has at least 40 GB of
   hard drive space, utilizes a solid-state drive, has an i5 or new
   processor and can allocate at least 512 MB of RAM for a single
   virtual machine.

-  Access to any one of the following virtualization software providers:

   -  VirtualBox – Linux, Mac OS X, Windows

   -  VMWare Workstation Player – Linux, Windows

-  An operating system to install. This step can vary based on student
   access to operating system software. If possible, install a
   Windows-based OS such as Windows 7. If unable to obtain a Windows
   license, install a Linux distribution such as Ubuntu Desktop from
   Ubuntu.org.

The end result of this lab is to create a single virtual machine that
utilizes host-only networking.

**Lab Files that are Needed:** No additional files are needed for this
lab.

STEP 1 – Install Virtualization Software
----------------------------------------

Using the virtualization software listed above, install the software in
your host OS. Provide a screenshot clearing showing the virtualization
software you used and its successful installation.

STEP 2 – Create Your Virtual Machine
------------------------------------

Using the guest OS you selected, install the guest OS in your virtual
machine. If uncertain about any configuration option during setup,
select the default. Give your VM the following resources:

::

  CPU – Single core
  Memory – 512 MB
  Hard-drive – 20 GB Linux, 40 GB Windows

.. note:: Provide a screenshot showing this configuration from within the guest OS. For example, in Windows you could use the properties page from My Computer.

STEP 3 – Configure Networking
-----------------------------

For the final step, configure your VM to use host-only networking. This
is accomplished through the networking section of the virtual machines
configuration. This is **NOT** configured inside the guest OS. Provide
screenshots of the following:

-  The configuration setting through your virtualization software

-  Open up a terminal or command window and try to ping a publicly
   accessible system, such as google.com. The ping should fail using
   host-only networking as the guest OS should **NOT** have a route to the
   internet

-  The output from running the *ipconfig/ifconfig* utility in the guest
   OS from a command window or terminal. Clearly show the IP assigned to
   the guest OS

What to submit 
--------------

Submit a Microsoft Word document or PDF that includes answers to the
questions posed along with screenshots demonstrating the installation of
the virtual machine.
